He was born Riley B. King, the son of Mississippi sharecroppers, the great grandson of slaves. He took the blues out of the cotton fields and the small clubs of the Chitlin circuit and gave it to the world. From the Las Vegas stage to the White House Rose Garden, from the Olympic Stadium to the Park Arena, from China's Great Wall to the Wailing Wall, for more than 50 years, B.B. King held the title of King of the Blues. B.B. King is a legend. This is his story. Ladies and gentlemen, how about a nice warm round of applause to welcome the world's greatest blues singer, the King of the Blues, B.B. King! There's nothing like the sound of B.B. King playing guitar. Nobody else plays the blues with the same distinction and intimacy. As soon as you hear him play, you know it's B.B. For 50 years, he was the best-known bluesman on the planet. Like Louis Armstrong or Frank Sinatra, B.B. King defined the sound of a musical genre and popularized it throughout the world. It's hard to imagine what the blues would sound like without him. He was born in obscurity on September 16, 1925, the son of Albert and Nora Eller King, sharecroppers living on a cotton plantation near the town of Indianola in the Mississippi Delta. The family's cabin was in the poorest town in the poorest state. For miles in all directions, there was nothing but tenant farms and cotton fields. Yet, the still country air was alive with the melodic shouts of hardworking sharecroppers, a tradition carried over from slavery. I started to learn that hearing a lot of the people sing in the fields, they wasn't always singing gospel songs. Some of them was what some people called field hollers. I had an uncle named Jack Bennett who was very good at it and several other people. And I learned then that they wasn't singing gospel songs, they were singing blues. I liked it. Young Riley was raised in the very cradle of the blues, a short distance from small towns like Inverness, where Howlin' Wolf was born, and Rolling Fork, the birthplace of Muddy Waters. And it was this legacy that he was destined to continue. When Riley was about five years old, his parents split up. Young Riley moved with his mother to her family home in the hills of Kilmichael, Mississippi. Though the move was barely more than 50 miles away, the distance felt huge. Both Riley's mother and grandmother were religious, and he regularly attended services with them at the Holiness Church. Here, Young Riley met his first musical influence, preacher Archie Fair. The reverend's powerful sermons seemed like music to Riley. And when the preacher actually played music, Young Riley was praising the Lord. Singing with the congregation, Riley developed what would become a powerful vocal style. He also developed a fascination with the preacher's guitar. When the right reverend showed a curious Riley how to play a few chords, the strings resonated with the very first sounds of B.B. King. At the tender age of nine, Riley faced perhaps the greatest tragedy of his life, the death of his beloved mother. Grief-stricken, Riley moved in with his grandmother, who died less than two years later. The house he lived in at the time with his grandmother was a house that was built and lived in by my uncle up until his death. And B.B. asked me if it would be all right to drive a nail or two in the wall. And I told him, sure, help yourself. So he drove a nail high up on the porch and then down low, tied his wire from one nail to the other as tight as he could. Then he took some wooden chips, dry wooden chips, and put behind the wire, between the wire and the wall, to give it the tension that he wanted for the tune he wanted. And when he'd come home from lunch after either working in his own field or helping his grandmother, to eat his lunch, he'd go out and lay on his front porch and thump that one wire. He got to be good. By the age of 10, Riley King was living on his own. He'd always been something of a solitary child. But now he was a confirmed loner, a quality that has defined his entire life. I guess as a plow boy, I followed a mule, walking 12 hours a day, which was about 60 miles a day, about six days a week. And you would do that about six months out of the year, which would run up in the thousands of thousands of miles. So I would think in 16 years of doing that, I've walked practically around the world. He remained on the move for the next 60 years, spending most of his life on an endless road. By 1935, the country was in the middle of the Great Depression. The poverty that encompassed the nation was all too familiar to Riley. He filled his time with work, school, and his Aunt Mimi's record collection. When my aunt would buy records by Blind Lemon, something I would hear that would just go through me like a sword. Well, I heard the same thing from Lonnie Johnson. So these two people ring in my head, and it still does. Even today, I carry a tape of Blind Lemon and one of Lonnie Johnson in my shoulder bag with me all the time. Their guitars were crying his tears. Their blues were bleeding his blood. He wanted a guitar of his own. I found a person that was in the area that had this guitar, and he wanted $15 for the guitar. I made $15 a month at that time. And I asked my boss, Mr. Cotledge, if he would get it for me. So he said yes. And he paid for it. And I remember having to pay him back half of my month's salary the first month, and then half the next month. Riley became obsessed with the cherry red acoustic Stella. He played it night and day to quell his fear, loneliness, anger, sadness. He tried to copy his blues heroes, but he soon discovered that you can't just imitate the blues. You have to live them. Just as Riley started to adjust to his solitary lifestyle, his estranged father, Albert King, showed up out of nowhere and reclaimed his son. He packed up Riley and took him to live with his new family in the more cosmopolitan town of Lexington. For the first time, Riley had electricity, an indoor toilet, and white neighbors. The shy country boy found it difficult fitting into his new family and his new town. Things were made worse when Riley witnessed the hanging of a young black man in front of the Lexington court building. B.B. had grown up with segregation, but this kind of hatred was something totally different. The image of the dead man hanging from the tree was indelibly etched in B.B.'s mind. Unhappy with his life in Lexington, Riley eventually joined his kin back in Indianola. He attained a skilled job as a tractor driver. He also formed a gospel group, a five-man chorus made up of plantation field hands. Riley ambitiously named the group the Famous St. John's Gospel Singers. They sang at churches and occasionally their live performances were broadcast on local radio. Unfortunately, the other members didn't share Riley's longing for fame. The young man who would become B.B. King had dreams too big for Mississippi. It would take a visit to his home from a legendary blues man to show him the way to glory. The teenage B.B. King was full of raw talent, but Indianola, Mississippi, had little to offer in the way of musical mentors. He found one when his worldly cousin, Booker White, paid a visit to the plantation. Booker was one of the top bottleneck guitarists and rural blues performers of the time. Although Riley couldn't imitate Booker's slide guitar style, he was fascinated with his music and his life as a blues man. Riley learned that singing gospel songs might garner an encouraging word, but belting out the blues could earn something more. When people would ask me to sing spiritual songs, they usually would thank me. That was very kind to me, but usually if a guy asked me to sing blues, I usually had a very fine tone.waiting for me. I found that on some Saturday evenings I would make more money just singing on the street corners than I had all week working on the plantation. Sometimes Riley would play as many as four towns on a single Saturday night. This was a time when the South was mired in segregation laws. There were very few places that welcomed black musicians and B.B.'s memories are littered with humiliating incidents. At the age of 17, Riley B. King asked his sweetheart Martha Denton to marry him. Six months later, they were newlyweds living in their own cottage on the plantation. But the bombing of Pearl Harbor changed all that. In 1943, on his 18th birthday, Riley registered for military service. He wanted the adventure, the travel, and the respect that a uniform promised. But much like the plantation he was raised on, the army was deeply segregated. He noted that even the German prisoners of war were treated better than the black American soldiers. While in the army, Riley was introduced to the music of Charlie Christian and T-Bone Walker. For the first time, he heard the blues played on an electric guitar. Man, when I heard of T-Bone Walker, oh, that did it. Cotton and soybean crops became more and more essential for the troops abroad. As a skilled tractor driver, Riley qualified for a farm deferment. He was given the choice to continue in the service or return home to his young bride and the farm. Riley chose home. Then a strange twist of fate came and forced his hand. Riley wrecked his tractor. Fearing the wrath of his boss, the 20-year-old Riley B. King left his wife and stuck out his thumb on Highway 49. He was heading north for Memphis, his first stop on a lifelong journey that would take him many times around the world. When the grocery truck on which Riley hitched a ride finally pulled into Memphis, he thought he had gone to heaven. Big streets, fancy stores, well-dressed ladies, and of course, music. If you were an aspiring musician in the South, you went to Memphis. This little city on the banks of the Mississippi was alive with sound. It was the capital of black music. Riley knew he was in the right place. Riley got his musical education up and down the street. It was like a conservatory for African-American music, and Riley was its most eager student. When I got to Beale Street, it was like a fantasy coming true. It was actually that. It was a place to learn, to make friends. It was a place kind of like a little world all of your own. I didn't think of Memphis as Memphis. I thought of Beale Street as Memphis. People come from miles around to come to Beale Street, and I told a white fella once, I said, hey man, if you were black for one Saturday night and on Beale Street, never would you want to be white again. He eventually met up with his cousin, Booker White, and what Riley didn't already know about the art of the blues, Booker taught him. From how to hold his guitar, to how to phrase lyrics, most importantly, he tutored Riley on how to endure the life of a blues man. Even though Riley made enough money to pay off his tractor debts, he couldn't return to Indianola after the excitement of Memphis. In late 1948, he met the legendary DJ, Sonny Boy Williamson, who had a blues radio show on station KWEM. Riley persuaded Sonny Boy to let him play a song on his show. Afterward, the radio station was flooded with calls. Sonny Boy set Riley up with a gig at Miss Annie's 16th Avenue Grill in West Memphis. It was Riley's big break. A regular engagement at the 16th Avenue Grill led to his own radio spot on WDIA. In 1948, WDIA became one of the first all-black managed radio stations in the country. It was called the Mother Station of the Negro. The station gave Riley a 10-minute spot in which he could play guitar, promote his performances at the grill, and sing anything he liked, as long as he promoted a new health tonic called Pepticon. Pepticon, sure is good. Pepticon, sure is good. Pepticon, sure is good. Get it in a place in your neighborhood. When B.B. would come on and start the singing Pepticon, I would turn my radio off. B.B. sounded so bad on it, but it worked. King's spot became so popular, Riley was promoted to DJ. He played recordings by black artists, played live guitar with a trio, and sang requests from listeners. Now that he was a DJ, Riley needed a catchy name. He started out as the Beale Street Blues Boy. Later, he changed it to Blues Boy King, and finally shortened it to B.B. King. In 1949, B.B. King released his debut single, a celebration of his wife, entitled Miss Martha King. B.B.'s early recordings for Bullet caught the attention of talent scout Ike Turner. In the summer of 1949, B.B. signed his first recording contract. As a young musician, B.B. was spending more and more time away from his wife, but there was a new woman in his life, and her name was Lucille. A personalized Gibson, Lucille is B.B. King's most identifiable trademark. She got her name back in the late 1940s. We used to play this place called Twist, Arkansas. We used to play there every Friday and every Saturday, and Sundays too if it rained, because if it rained, the people didn't have to work the next day. But it used to get quite cold in Twist during the wintertime. They set this great big pail, looked like a garbage pail. They'd sit it in the middle of the floor, half fill it with kerosene. They'd light that fuel, and then that's what we used for heat. Now everybody usually would dance around this big container, you see. At that time, they used to dance real close together like, you know. And they'd dance around this container, never disturbing. But one night, two guys, well maybe they got just a little bit tipsy. Somebody in the band say he got drunk. Anyway, they start to fight. One of them knocked the other one over on this container, and it spilled on the floor. Now it was already burning, so when it spilled on the floor, it looked like a big river fire. And everybody started making it for the front door, including B.B. King. But when I got on the outside, I remembered that I'd run off and left my guitar, so I went back for it. Almost lost my life trying to save my guitar. The next morning, we found these two guys that was fighting, that was fighting about a lady. Now I didn't meet the lady, but I hear that her name was Lucille. So I named my guitar Lucille to remind me never to do a thing like that again. That's why I called my guitar Lucille. B.B. King was starting to catch on with the release of fine singles like B.B. Boogie, recorded at Sam Phillips' Sun Studio. King's success paved the way for Phillips to later record early rock and rollers, including Elvis Presley. Like the young Elvis Presley, B.B.'s sound was not yet as distinctive as it would become, but his promise was undeniable. Locally, B.B. was a celebrity, but outside of Memphis, no one had heard of B.B. King. That was about to change. I ask you where you're going and you tell me where you're going. In 1951, B.B. King hired his first manager, Beale Street Pool Hall owner Robert Henry, who also operated a record shop, an amusement park, and a few restaurants. Now it is three o'clock in the morning. Late the same year, B.B.'s seventh R.P.M. single, Three O'Clock Blues, hit Billboard's R&B chart. By early 1952, the song reached the number one position and stayed there for 15 weeks. As a result of the success of Three O'Clock Blues and the follow-up, Darling, You Know I Love You, Robert Henry was able to get B.B. a contract with Universal Artists in New York. Oh, darling, darling, you know I love you, I'd love you for myself. But you're gone, gone and left me for someone else. Before long, B.B. was booked into the three major black theaters in the country, the Howard in Washington, D.C., the Royal in Baltimore, and the Apollo in Harlem. That's the night.18 months after he'd first performed on Sonny Boy Williams' radio show, B.B. took a leave of absence from his job at WDIA and left Memphis for Washington to start on his first national tour. It was the first leg of a long road, singing the praises of the music he loved. ♪♪ This newfound success, however, put B.B.'s marriage under a heavy strain. Martha King knew that as an entertainer, B.B. was subject to adoring young female fans. It was only a matter of time before the tension resulted in divorce. In 1952, while B.B. was on tour, he got word that Martha had left Memphis and filed for divorce after eight years of marriage. By 1953, B.B. had a national presence on the Chitlin circuit, a loose chain of roadhouses with mostly black clientele. He performed constantly throughout the 50s, playing as many as 250 shows a year on the national blues tour. But B.B. King was still unknown to the rest of America. ♪ I've got a good life to give up living. And go shopping in the city. In 1955, B.B. King purchased a used bus from Greyhound for $5,000. He named it Big Red. While on tour in Texas, the bus swerved to avoid a car, slid into the path of an oncoming truck, and hit it head-on. Miraculously, no one on B.B.'s bus was hurt, but the truck burst into flames, killing the driver instantly. As the band members crawled out of the back windows of the bus, they saw the other passenger running down the bridge with his clothes on fire. He reached the water's edge, but it was too late. ♪ Although he had spared his life, B.B. was not spared financial ruin. The Friday before the crash, King's motor vehicle insurance was terminated. B.B.'s liability was settled at just under $100,000, a debt that would take years to pay off. ♪ Forced to tour even more rigorously, B.B. used his $10,000 savings as the down payment on a new Skyliner bus. His tour schedule was relentless. In 1956 alone, B.B. and his band played 342 one-night stands. He married his second wife, Sue Hall, in 1958, but the tension of B.B.'s constant travel eventually drove the couple apart. And there were other problems. ♪ B.B. was a ladies' man. He loved women. He loved to talk about women and think about women. And as a musician, he was constantly approached by women. It was a side benefit that he wasn't able to pass up. ♪ But, as he admitted, there was an enormous human cost. Most of his 15 children were born in the 50s and 60s, all to different women, none of whom were ever his wife. If it's anything that I've ever failed in, in my career, I think being a father was one. I have never been the father that many fathers are or should be. One of my daughters pointed out to me, she said, Daddy, you've never been with us when we needed you. And that kind of hurt. It kind of hurt. Because what, she said, part of it is right, because I was never there to always tuck them in bed, as a lot of fathers do. But every time she needed a doctor, I had the money to send her. If she needed food, she never had to go without food. None of them, if I knew it, like I did, I went without food much of the time when I was ill. In 1964, B.B. King had a top 40 hit with Rock Me Baby. ♪ He signed a new deal with ABC Paramount, home of Ray Charles and Fats Domino. For the first time, he added brass, Latin percussion, and a female chorus to his records. As LPs gained popularity, B.B. was able to stretch out, change the structure of his solos, and give them space to build. Although the essential character of B.B. King's music always remained. ♪ B.B. emerged as one of the most readily identifiable guitar stylists ever. He was the master of the electric blues guitar. His technique was complex, with delicate single string runs, punctuated by loud, decisive chords and sinuous bent notes. He called it the electric eel. Much of the technique of modern rock guitar has been derived from B.B.'s playing style. In the way B.B. borrowed from the likes of Blind Lemon Jefferson and T-Bone Walker, he in turn became a model for artists like Jeff Beck and Eric Clapton. One of his most acclaimed albums, Live at the Regal, was released in July 1965. For B.B., it may have been just another show in Chicago, but Live at the Regal stands among the very best in live blues recordings. This was the first of 14 live albums B.B. recorded. They are perhaps his best, conveying a dimension of his talent only hinted at in the studio. Only the dynamics of a live audience ignite the full force of B.B.'s power. By the late 60s, the blues fan base started slipping away. Soul and funk music seemed to celebrate newfound freedom and civil rights. Black audiences wanted to define themselves differently, to create a new identity. For them, the blues represented a troubled past they wanted to leave behind. A lot of times the fans that was coming to see these popular artists didn't know that it was my orchestra playing behind, even though it was printed on the placards, but a lot of people would overlook the small-known parts where it said B.B. King. Anyway, I was in Baltimore, Maryland one day, and this one time I remember in particular, when the MC introduced everybody and everybody, and finally B.B. King, the kids booed me, and that hurt me, that hurt me deeply. Really hurt me, because I didn't feel that they was really doing it just because it was B.B. King, but it was because I'm the blues singer. But B.B. remained true to the blues. Even in his slowest periods, he went out on the road. He had little support from popular radio, which rarely played blues recordings. Instead, B.B. toured nonstop. It was his only way to be heard. But while black audiences continued to dwindle, B.B. noticed that white fans were slowly showing interest in his sound. When we used to play the Fillmore, 80% was black at that time. But now since this new, happy mood left, I've never seen this many white kids at once before. Never. People, body to body, body to body, all the way across the stairways as you go up, they're sitting close together like this. And most of them long hair. Different style of people. I haven't been seeing people like this, or a lot of them together once in a while you see them. Oh my God, I said to myself, I think we're in the wrong place. So I tell my road manager, B.B. I think they made a mistake. I think the agents made a mistake, so better go in and find out what's going on. So he did, he went in and he spoke to, and Bill Graham himself came out and said, No, you didn't make a mistake. This is it. Come on in. In 1967, King hired a new manager, Sid Seidenberg. Seidenberg was a music industry accountant, and his first task was to put B.B. on a five year business plan. It was essential for B.B. to open up new markets to replace the decline in his traditional following. If the black audience had been blewed out, there was a new white audience. Come on, B.B. I'll get you. No, you don't have to stay a while. From the mid-60s to the mid-70s, the white rock market was seeking out its musical roots in the blues. Groups like the Rolling Stones, Cream, and Led Zeppelin were playing songs by Muddy Waters, Howling Wolf, Willie Dixon, and Robert Johnson. Most hard rock was based on early blues riffs. Young fans were suddenly discovering the real roots of rock.It's funny Eric that you should bring up BB King as your chief influences because ten years from now we'll be able to dig Muddy Waters, Screamin' Jay Hawkins, people like that, going way back, Boca White, but they can't now because of the colour scene and the prejudice scene? I think a lot there, there's a lot of that in it, I mean, you know, I don't think... And that a white group prejudices it. Especially in America it's going to be around for a long time just because of the prejudice. So really you feel that the type of things that people like Mayong who are playing the blues and yourself and Cream are nothing but kind of a prejudice gap between the real thing and... Socially, socially, musically no, there's something else happening. It's a completely different type. And also the reasons for why we're doing it are probably a lot different to that too. The most successful period of BB King's career followed. He opened for the Rolling Stones 1969 tour, playing before a cumulative audience of a million fans, more people than had seen him in all the years up until that time. In 1970, BB finally broke through the Radio Barrier when he recorded the Roy Hawkins song, The Thrill Is Gone. The record shot up to number 15 on the pop charts and to number three on the R&B charts. It became BB's signature tune, leading to his first Grammy Award and catapulting his career into the international stratosphere. The Thrill Is Gone, baby, you know you've done me wrong, baby, and you're gonna be sorry someday. It was manager Sid Seidenberg's idea to use the success of The Thrill Is Gone to book BB into the lucrative Vegas Lounge circuit. But it ultimately took the clout of BB fan and Vegas megastar Frank Sinatra to help King overcome the racist booking policies of the era. When BB King finally premiered at Caesars Palace, the audience loved him. He became a regular from that point on. He even made Las Vegas his home. If you would let me love you, baby. As BB's audience continued to broaden, the boy who once wanted to be a preacher brought the blues to the musical heathens and made thousands of converts. I would even try to wash the water for you, baby. It had taken 20 years and a lot of sweat and guitar strength, but BB King had finally landed his music into mainstream America. He was now ready to take on the world. If you would let me love you. I can do this. Love songs make you feel so much better sometimes. When success finally came, it just made BB King work harder to legitimize the blues. In 1970, he made the first of what would be many appearances on The Tonight Show with Johnny Carson. And not long after, he was invited to perform on The Ed Sullivan Show. Both bookings were the first for a blues musician. The same year saw BB play another first. He performed before jail inmates in Chicago. Hyde and Cook County Jail was released in March of 1971 and became one of his most acclaimed albums. Some people die for love, some die for hate. Some die because they don't have no mate. And all I want is just a little bit of love. All I want is just a little bit of love. He made frequent visits to prisons across America and even won a Grammy for an album he made at San Quentin. Soon thereafter, BB started the Foundation for the Advancement of Inmate Rehabilitation and Recreation with attorney F. Lee Bailey. Everybody needs something to make things a little bit better. So if we think in terms of the warden, the commissioner, all of the officials that they need money to help to make the facilities better, that in turn make things better for the inmates. Well, I feel that I'm that little bit of that little key spark. Not only that, I think that had it not been for good guidance by many good people, Riley King could have just as easily been one of the inmates as BB King, the entertainer. On one prison visit, BB came face to face with his own inadequacies as an absentee father. One of the inmates in the audience was his own daughter. This young person is my heart. This is my daughter, Patty King. Out of all the 23 years I've done these facilities, this is the first time I've ever did one with a family member in trouble. And I wish there could have been a better father than I have been in some ways. By now, BB had become by far the most identifiable name in the world of blues. He was its unofficial ambassador, taking Lucille with him to every corner of the world. He toured the farthest countries of the earth, Ghana and Nigeria, Chad and Liberia, Australia and New Zealand, Japan and Europe. He even electrified stages in the USSR in 1979 when the curtain was still iron. With his days as an impoverished tenant farmer a not so distant memory, it was particularly meaningful to BB when his hometown of Indianola paid tribute to their native son. They painted a guitar on the street corner where he played and renamed its main thoroughfare BB King Road. BB King had become musical royalty. Once at a Washington, D.C. garden party for Queen Elizabeth of England, King retreated to a quiet corner to sip his tea and a large crowd quickly congregated. The Reverend Jesse Jackson commented, looks like more people are lining up to see the king than the queen. I was walking down the streets at sunrise one morning in London, England, and I saw this long black Rolls Royce limousine pulling slowly down the street. And then this limousine was the Queen of England. Looking tired, just got back from a party. And she leaned out and she said, aren't you BB King? The thrill has not gone. The king of the blues, BB King. In 1987, BB King was recognized by his peers when he was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Twenty years after BB opened for the Rolling Stones, rock superstars U2 invited him to join their 89 world tour and record the song When Love Comes to Town, which Bono wrote especially for King. The record was a worldwide hit and BB King captured yet another generation of listeners. The blues made BB a rich man and having grown up in abject poverty, it was hard for him to turn down money. He has appeared in movies, television shows and numerous commercials. A natural salesman ever since he first sang about the virtues of Pepticon back in the 1940s, BB seemed willing to endorse anything. This left a bad taste in the mouth of some blues purists who have accused him of selling out. On the other hand, BB has always struggled to represent the blues in a positive light. In defiance of the stereotypical blues man image, BB became a non-smoker who preferred vegetarian cuisine and non-alcoholic beverages. And his commitment to keeping the music alive can never be matched. He lent his backing to two successful blues nightclubs that bear his name, one in Los Angeles and one in Memphis on the very street where he got his start. On his 70th birthday, BB staged a Blues Summit concert at his Beale Street Blues Club. A recording of that event won him another Grammy Award. He traded licks and lyrics with a remarkable variety of artists as musicians of all ages and styles sought the honor of playing with their mentor. BB earned all the trappings of wealth and celebrity. An oppressive home in Las Vegas, complete with a Rolls Royce in the garage. Still, none of these comforts ever inspired Kim to slow down. His biggest year was yet to come.For over four decades, B.B. King toured the world, but in 1996, the world came to B.B. when he performed in the closing ceremonies of the Olympic Games in Atlanta, Georgia. That same year, he traveled to Bosnia and Hungary on behalf of the USO to lift the spirits of American troops. Over the course of his career, B.B. King received 19 nominations and won seven Grammys, including a Lifetime Achievement Award. He was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame and the Blues Foundation Hall of Fame. His imprint was added to the Hollywood Walk of Fame between Milton Berle and Vivian Leigh, and he received a star on Hollywood Boulevard. Garnering some of the highest honors awarded to an American, B.B. King received the Presidential Medal of the Arts, the National Heritage Fellowship from the National Endowment for the Arts, and the Kennedy Center Honors. Although he never attended college, B.B. received four honorary doctorates, including one from Yale University. In 1997, B.B. still played a remarkable 250 shows and released a new album of duets with top stars from rock, pop, country, R&B, and hip-hop. On Deuce's Wild, artists such as the Rolling Stones, Tracy Chapman, Eric Clapton, Bonnie Raitt, and Morrison, D'Angelo, Willie Nelson, and Hezzy D paid homage to the man they credit with having influenced their music. I just have to say I'm standing next to B.B. King. Ah! I'm the one that's on the line. Oh, my gosh. Riley B. King made certain that the thrill would never go, for he firmly placed the blues in the landscape of American music. From a shack in Indianola to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, B.B. has been on a long, hard journey, and he's emerged triumphant, the king of the road. His influence on music has been staggering. His guitar work echoes through the fields of the Delta, the clubs of Beale Street, the concert halls of America, the rock arenas of the world, and the homes of his many generations of fans. B.B. King's legacy is the cry of a blues guitar in the jungles of northern Thailand, the blues chorus in the Mali desert night, or the sound of a young band in a bar off a Midwestern highway. The whole world knows the blues because of B.B. King. He's imitated, envied, loved, and respected. B.B. King is a legend. ♪ With the stuff I use ♪ I'm the king of the blues ♪ The thrill is gone Whoo! ♪ The thrill is gone away ♪ Oh, the thrill is gone, baby ♪ The thrill is gone away ♪ I know you done me wrong ♪ And you're gonna be sorry someday Thrill is gone! Whoo! ♪ The thrill is gone away from me ♪ The thrill is gone, baby ♪ The thrill is gone away from me ♪ Although I'm still alone ♪ But so lonely ♪ I'm the king of the blues